README.md, before:

About
-----
Pmod is a light-weight environment module system written in Python. Initially it
came out as the successor of a complicated shell script for managing
user-dependent environmental variables. As shell script was not well suited for
such tasks, and we did not have enough time to deploy and learn advanced module
systems like Lmod, we decided to write our own module system.

Pmod is designed with simplicity in mind and implemented in an intuitive
objected-oriented manner. Of course, the limits of our knowledge and programming
skills prohibit the possibility of creating an advanced environment module
system as we are students majoring in physics, not computers. Installation of
pmod is very easy. No prerequisites are required besides Python. Root privileges
are not required if pmod is not to be installed for all users. Configuration of
pmod requires some basic Python knowledge.

Despite its simplicity, the basic capabilities of a common module system are
supported, such as listing available and loaded modules, obtaining the module
status, loading and unloading modules with automatic prerequisites and
conflicting modules resolving, diagnosis on module usability, searching for
given modules and printing their configuration details. New features may be
added as we have more user experience in actual applications, e.g. support for
other shells in addition to bash.


Install
-------
Pmod does not have any other dependencies except Python. Both Python 2 and
Python 3 are supported. The common installation procedure is as below:

1. Copy all files and directories to the installation destination, e.g.
   ~/soft/pmod. If you plan to install pmod for all the users, we suggest
   /opt/pmod as the installation destination. Note that in this case root
   privileges will be required.

2. Edit init/bash.sh to update PM\_ROOT to the installation destination of pmod
   in step 1.

3. Add the command to source init/bash.sh in your ~/.bashrc. If pmod is to be
   installed for all the users, copy init/bash.sh to /etc/profile.d or source it
   in /etc/profile. The latter is recommended.

4. Ordinary users may not have the privileges to generate \*.pyc files outside
   their home directory. In that case, load each python environment (e.g.
   different versions of Anaconda) and type 'module list' to generate these
   files in advance.


Configuration
-------------
Configurations of available modules are stored in modulefiles/setup.py as an
instance of the *ModManager* class. bin/modcmd.py then imports this instance and
calls its methods to perform specified operations. Inside this class a
dictionary named *available\_mods* contains all the module definitions.

Each module is presented with an instance of the *Module* class, which has five
lists: *environ*, *depend*, *conflict*, *command* and *alias*. Each element of
*environ* is a tuple with three elements: action to be performed, name of the
environmental variable, and the string with which the environmental variable
will be modified. Modules can have dependencies, conflicting modules,
additional initialization scripts and aliases settings, as stored in the lists
of *depend*, *conflict*, *command* and *alias* respectively. Each element of
*alias* is a tuple of (alias name, alias string).

The auxiliary method *add\_mod()* of *ModManager* is provided for the
manipulation of modules, which calls the *add\_settings()* method of *Module*.
A set of predefined elements to self.environ can be added automatically
according to the *preset* argument, which should be in "mod", "path", "lib",
"inc", "py",  and "void". Sub-directories like "bin", "lib" and "included" are
deduced automatically when preset is set to "mod", but not in other cases.
Setting preset to "void" will create an empty module without any predefined
elements. Empty modules are useful when creating a collection of many modules,
with all the members claimed as dependencies. You can also modify
*available\_mods* directly if you prefer.

See pmod/config.py and pmod/modmanager.py for more details. Two configuration
files on our servers are provided in the *examples* directory.


Usage
-----
The common usage of pmod is "pmod [-f] operation [mod\_name...]". -f forces to
disables automatic mode,  More details about the automatic mode will be given in
the next section. For now the implemented operations are:

- avail, av: list all available modules

- status, stat: print the status of modules

- list, ls: list all loaded modules

- info, show, display: show configuration details of specified modules

- diagnose, probe: check for usability of specified modules

- search: search for modules matching given pattern, with regular expressions
          support

- load, add: load specified modules

- unload, remove, rm, delete, del: unload specified modules

- clean, purge: unload all modules

- reload, update: reload all loaded modules

See modcmd.py for more details.


Automatic mode
--------------
You may find that pmod may not behave as you expect. For example, loading module
a will load not only this module itself, but also all of its prerequisites.
Moreover, many other modules may be unloaded even if you did not perform any
such operations. Unloading a specified module might 'fail' as nothing happens
actually. These abnormalities are caused by the 'automatic mode'.

Generally speaking, in automatic mode all the loaded modules must be usable. If
a module is not usable, then it should be removed from the loaded modules. For
that purpose, the following operations are triggered when loading specified
targets:

1. Prerequisites of the targets are loaded.
2. Conflicting modules of the targets are unloaded.
3. Unusable modules due to conflicts with modules to load are unloaded.
4. Unusable modules due to dependency on modules to unload are unloaded.

When unloading specified targets, the following operations are triggered:

1. Prerequisites of the targets that are not required by any loaded modules are
   unloaded.
2. Unusable modules due to dependency on modules to unload are unloaded.

The automatically mode are enabled by default. Append '-f' or '--force\_no\_auto'
to the command-line parameters if you don't like this feature. Keep in mind
that the loaded modules may be not usable as it seems to be in this case.


FAQ (in advance)
----------------
**Q: Why not separate configuration files into different files organized in many
   directories like that in lmod?**

A: Doing so will increase the complexity of designing and using this software.
   Moreover, the package management mechanism of Python does not allow
   additional periods ('.') in the file name. So if version is to be included in
   configuration file names, the periods have to be replaced with underscores
   ('\_'). We don't think it a big problem to include all the configurations in
   one python file if the number of modules to manage is lower than 100. If you
   do have a lot of modules, and do not like a large configuration file, we
   recommend you the professional environmental module systems like Lmod.

**Q: How about version management?**

A: Version management is supported by pmod, but not directly. For example, if
   module foo has three versions, namely A, B and C, then in the definition of
   foo/A you should declare foo/B and foo/C as conflicting modules. For the
   definition of foo/B and foo/C, declare the other versions as conflicting
   modules mutually. It will not take much effort using list comprehension or
   set difference. Switching between different versions is as simple as invoking
   'module -a load module/B'.

**Q: How can I define a meta-module that loads a collection of other modules?**

A: Define it as a void module and add all the modules to load as dependencies.

**Q: What if the default preset of environmental variables cannot meet my needs?
    And how can I change the default behaviours of loading and unloading modules
    ?**

A: Derive your own class from the base *Module* class and override appropriate
   methods. Then pass the derived class as the *mod\_class* keyword argument to
   the *create_mod* function calls in modulefiles/setup.py. You are recommended
   to put the class definition files in the same place as setup.py. An example
   is given in examples/custom.

**Q: How to use a Software Module hierarchy?**

A: There are at least two approaches. One approach is to conditionally add
   modules to module manager, e.g. depending on whether some specific modules
   have been loaded or not, which is similar to that of lmod. However, this
   approach has many disadvantages. The modulefiles package initialization
   scripts will become complicated and bug prone. The other disadvantage is that
   if loading module A creates modules that are not dependent on it, then these
   modules will become unavailable to module manager if module A is unloaded
   although their settings still reside in environmental variables. So we take
   another approach in an object-oriented manner.

   In our opinion, the most complicated and bug-prone part of a software module
   hierarchy is the maintenance of dependencies and conflicting modules. We
   propose to handle this problem with a hierarchy of module classes.

   In the root of the hierarchy lies the *Module* class that ships with Pmod.
   Compilers like GCC and Intel should have their own classes derived from
   *Module* class, e.g. *GNUCompiler* and *IntelCompiler*. These classes should
   have overridden __init__() methods that add conflicting modules to
   self.conflict.

   Compiler-dependent software should have their own classes derived from the
   compiler classes, e.g. *GNUCompilerDer* and *IntelCompilerDer*. Similar to
   compiler classes, classes of the compiler-dependent modules should have
   overridden __init__() methods that add the instance of the parent class as
   a dependency.

   Supposing that we have two versions of GCC installed: GCC/4.8.5 and
   GCC/8.2.1. We define define two classes for these compilers, namely GCC485
   and GCC821. In the __init__() methods of these classes, the other version of
   compiler should be claimed as conflicting modules mutually. Then we define
   GCC485Der and GCC821Der as derived classes of GCC485 and GCC821, for
   representing programs and libraries built from each compiler, respectively.
   In the __init__() methods of these derived classes, 'GCC/4.8.5' and
   'GCC/8.2.1' should be claimed as a dependency.

   For MPI implementations and MPI-dependent programs the hierarchy is similar
   to that of compilers. For example, if we have openmpi 3.1.3 built on
   GCC/4.8.5, we can derive the OpenMPI313 class from GCC485Der and
   OpenMPI313Der from OpenMPI313. conflicting modules and dependencies should be
   added in the __init__() methods of OpenMPI313 and OpenMPI313Der,
   respectively.

   In this approach the efforts required to maintain dependencies and
   conflicting modules will be significantly reduced, as many of them are
   inherited from the parent classes automatically. Also, there's no need to
   update the settings of a whole array of modules of derived class if the
   parent class changes. An example is given in examples/hierarchy, which is an
   refactored version of examples/n79.

Commit message:

Rewrote reloading procedures in auto_adjust_load and auto_adjust_unload

README.md, after:

About
-----
Pmod is a light-weight environment module system written in Python. Initially it
came out as the successor of a complicated shell script for managing
user-dependent environmental variables. As shell script was not well suited for
such tasks, and we did not have enough time to deploy and learn advanced module
systems like Lmod, we decided to write our own module system.

Pmod is designed with simplicity in mind and implemented in an intuitive
objected-oriented manner. Of course, the limits of our knowledge and programming
skills prohibit the possibility of creating an advanced environment module
system as we are students majoring in physics, not computers. Installation of
pmod is very easy. No prerequisites are required besides Python. Root privileges
are not required if pmod is not to be installed for all users. Configuration of
pmod requires some basic Python knowledge.

Despite its simplicity, the basic capabilities of a common module system are
supported, such as listing available and loaded modules, obtaining the module
status, loading and unloading modules with automatic prerequisites and
conflicting modules resolving, diagnosis on module usability, searching for
given modules and printing their configuration details. New features may be
added as we have more user experience in actual applications, e.g. support for
other shells in addition to bash.


Install
-------
Pmod does not have any other dependencies except Python. Both Python 2 and
Python 3 are supported. The common installation procedure is as below:

1. Copy all files and directories to the installation destination, e.g.
   ~/soft/pmod. If you plan to install pmod for all the users, we suggest
   /opt/pmod as the installation destination. Note that in this case root
   privileges will be required.

2. Edit init/bash.sh to update PM\_ROOT to the installation destination of pmod
   in step 1.

3. Add the command to source init/bash.sh in your ~/.bashrc. If pmod is to be
   installed for all the users, copy init/bash.sh to /etc/profile.d or source it
   in /etc/profile. The latter is recommended.

4. Ordinary users may not have the privileges to generate \*.pyc files outside
   their home directory. In that case, load each python environment (e.g.
   different versions of Anaconda) and type 'module list' to generate these
   files in advance.


Configuration
-------------
Configurations of available modules are stored in modulefiles/setup.py as an
instance of the *ModManager* class. bin/modcmd.py then imports this instance and
calls its methods to perform specified operations. Inside this class a
dictionary named *available\_mods* contains all the module definitions.

Each module is presented with an instance of the *Module* class, which has five
lists: *environ*, *depend*, *conflict*, *command* and *alias*. Each element of
*environ* is a tuple with three elements: action to be performed, name of the
environmental variable, and the string with which the environmental variable
will be modified. Modules can have dependencies, conflicting modules,
additional initialization scripts and aliases settings, as stored in the lists
of *depend*, *conflict*, *command* and *alias* respectively. Each element of
*alias* is a tuple of (alias name, alias string).

The auxiliary method *add\_mod()* of *ModManager* is provided for the
manipulation of modules, which calls the *add\_settings()* method of *Module*.
A set of predefined elements to self.environ can be added automatically
according to the *preset* argument, which should be in "mod", "path", "lib",
"inc", "py",  and "void". Sub-directories like "bin", "lib" and "included" are
deduced automatically when preset is set to "mod", but not in other cases.
Setting preset to "void" will create an empty module without any predefined
elements. Empty modules are useful when creating a collection of many modules,
with all the members claimed as dependencies. You can also modify
*available\_mods* directly if you prefer.

See pmod/config.py and pmod/modmanager.py for more details. Two configuration
files on our servers are provided in the *examples* directory.


Usage
-----
The common usage of pmod is "pmod [-f] operation [mod\_name...]". -f forces to
disables automatic mode,  More details about the automatic mode will be given in
the next section. For now the implemented operations are:

- avail, av: list all available modules

- status, stat: print the status of modules

- list, ls: list all loaded modules

- info, show, display: show configuration details of specified modules

- diagnose, probe: check for usability of specified modules

- search: search for modules matching given pattern, with regular expressions
          support

- load, add: load specified modules

- unload, remove, rm, delete, del: unload specified modules

- clean, purge: unload all modules

- reload, update: reload all loaded modules

See modcmd.py for more details.


Automatic mode
--------------
You may find that pmod may not behave as you expect. For example, loading module
a will load not only this module itself, but also all of its prerequisites.
Moreover, many other modules may be unloaded even if you did not perform any
such operations. Unloading a specified module might 'fail' as nothing happens
actually. These abnormalities are caused by the 'automatic mode'.

Generally speaking, in automatic mode all the loaded modules must be usable. If
a module is not usable, then it should be removed from the loaded modules. For
that purpose, the following operations are triggered when loading specified
targets:

1. Prerequisites of the targets are loaded.
2. Conflicting modules of the targets are unloaded.
3. Unusable modules whose dependencies have been unloaded or conflicting modules
   loaded will be removed.
4. Modules whose dependencies have been (re)loaded or conflicting modules
   unloaded will be reloaded.

When unloading specified targets, the following operations are triggered:

1. Prerequisites of the targets that are not required by any loaded modules are
   unloaded.
2. Unusable modules whose dependencies have been unloaded or conflicting modules
   loaded will be removed.
3. Modules whose dependencies have been (re)loaded or conflicting modules
   unloaded will be reloaded.

The automatically mode are enabled by default. Append '-f' or '--force\_no\_auto'
to the command-line parameters if you don't like this feature. Keep in mind
that the loaded modules may be not usable as it seems to be in this case.


FAQ (in advance)
----------------
**Q: Why not separate configuration files into different files organized in many
   directories like that in lmod?**

A: Doing so will increase the complexity of designing and using this software.
   Moreover, the package management mechanism of Python does not allow
   additional periods ('.') in the file name. So if version is to be included in
   configuration file names, the periods have to be replaced with underscores
   ('\_'). We don't think it a big problem to include all the configurations in
   one python file if the number of modules to manage is lower than 100. If you
   do have a lot of modules, and do not like a large configuration file, we
   recommend you the professional environmental module systems like Lmod.

**Q: How about version management?**

A: Version management is supported by pmod, but not directly. For example, if
   module foo has three versions, namely A, B and C, then in the definition of
   foo/A you should declare foo/B and foo/C as conflicting modules. For the
   definition of foo/B and foo/C, declare the other versions as conflicting
   modules mutually. It will not take much effort using list comprehension or
   set difference. Switching between different versions is as simple as invoking
   'module -a load module/B'.

**Q: How can I define a meta-module that loads a collection of other modules?**

A: Define it as a void module and add all the modules to load as dependencies.

**Q: What if the default preset of environmental variables cannot meet my needs?
    And how can I change the default behaviours of loading and unloading modules
    ?**

A: Derive your own class from the base *Module* class and override appropriate
   methods. Then pass the derived class as the *mod\_class* keyword argument to
   the *create_mod* function calls in modulefiles/setup.py. You are recommended
   to put the class definition files in the same place as setup.py. An example
   is given in examples/custom.

**Q: How to use a Software Module hierarchy?**

A: There are at least two approaches. One approach is to conditionally add
   modules to module manager, e.g. depending on whether some specific modules
   have been loaded or not, which is similar to that of lmod. However, this
   approach has many disadvantages. The modulefiles package initialization
   scripts will become complicated and bug prone. The other disadvantage is that
   if loading module A creates modules that are not dependent on it, then these
   modules will become unavailable to module manager if module A is unloaded
   although their settings still reside in environmental variables. So we take
   another approach in an object-oriented manner.

   In our opinion, the most complicated and bug-prone part of a software module
   hierarchy is the maintenance of dependencies and conflicting modules. We
   propose to handle this problem with a hierarchy of module classes.

   In the root of the hierarchy lies the *Module* class that ships with Pmod.
   Compilers like GCC and Intel should have their own classes derived from
   *Module* class, e.g. *GNUCompiler* and *IntelCompiler*. These classes should
   have overridden __init__() methods that add conflicting modules to
   self.conflict.

   Compiler-dependent software should have their own classes derived from the
   compiler classes, e.g. *GNUCompilerDer* and *IntelCompilerDer*. Similar to
   compiler classes, classes of the compiler-dependent modules should have
   overridden __init__() methods that add the instance of the parent class as
   a dependency.

   Supposing that we have two versions of GCC installed: GCC/4.8.5 and
   GCC/8.2.1. We define define two classes for these compilers, namely GCC485
   and GCC821. In the __init__() methods of these classes, the other version of
   compiler should be claimed as conflicting modules mutually. Then we define
   GCC485Der and GCC821Der as derived classes of GCC485 and GCC821, for
   representing programs and libraries built from each compiler, respectively.
   In the __init__() methods of these derived classes, 'GCC/4.8.5' and
   'GCC/8.2.1' should be claimed as a dependency.

   For MPI implementations and MPI-dependent programs the hierarchy is similar
   to that of compilers. For example, if we have openmpi 3.1.3 built on
   GCC/4.8.5, we can derive the OpenMPI313 class from GCC485Der and
   OpenMPI313Der from OpenMPI313. conflicting modules and dependencies should be
   added in the __init__() methods of OpenMPI313 and OpenMPI313Der,
   respectively.

   In this approach the efforts required to maintain dependencies and
   conflicting modules will be significantly reduced, as many of them are
   inherited from the parent classes automatically. Also, there's no need to
   update the settings of a whole array of modules of derived class if the
   parent class changes. An example is given in examples/hierarchy, which is an
   refactored version of examples/n79.
